Ylli: 0:00.
In terms of US versus China,
did they have a centrally pushed policy to invest
and get ahead in AI? Yes, they did. It's a public
strategy that they had. Where they're organized
for that competition. Yes, they were just because
they have a different political system. They can
drive their private sector in this competition
because there's a similar fusion that they have.
Did they put enormous resources behind this? They
did. Did they appoint national AI champions to
serve as the companies that will propagate and
advance the CCP agenda globally? Yes, they did. We
all know that, and so I think in some aspects, the
pre GenAI period, they were moving fast. We have
to get ourselves organized, we have to finance
ourselves, put enough resources. I think CHIPS Act
is one of the elements I think towards that end.
Craig: 0:46
Hi, my name is Craig Smith,
and this is Eye on AI. In this episode, I sit down
with Ylli Bajraktari, executive Director of the
Special Competitive Studies Project, which is a
follow-on organization to the National Security
Commission on AI focused on maintaining the US
lead in AI. Ylli provides invaluable insights
into the current state of the AI race between the
US and China, discussing the implications of the
latest advancements in generative AI. He also
sheds light on the so-called Offset-X strategy,
the National Plan for Microelectronics and the
upcoming Special Competitive Studies Project AI
Expo in Washington DC in May. Join us for an
in-depth look at the critical role AI plays
in shaping our national security. I hope you
find the conversation as important as I did.
Craig: 1:52
Hi, good tech solves
problems that you've thought about. Great tech
solves problems that you haven't even thought of.
What can the commerce platform trusted by millions
of merchants do for you? It's time for Shopify,
the commerce platform revolutionizing millions
of businesses worldwide. Whether you're a garage
entrepreneur or IPO ready, Shopify is the only
tool you need to start, run, and grow your
business without the struggle. Shopify puts
you in control of every sales channel. So,
whether you're selling satin sheets from Shopify's
in-person point of sale system or offering organic
olive oil on Shopify's all-in-one e-commerce
platform, you're covered. Shopify powers 10% of
all e-commerce in the United States and Shopify's
truly a global force, powering Allbirds, Rothy's,
and Brooklyn and millions of other entrepreneurs
of every size across over 170 countries. Plus,
Shopify's award-winning help is there to
support your success every step of the way.
Craig: 3:02
Sign up for a $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com/eyeonai, that's
shopify S-H-O-P-I-F-Y dot com slash eye on ai,
that's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all run together.
So, sign up for a $1 a month trial period
at shopify.com/eyeonai, that's shopify
S-H-O-P-I-F-Y dot com slash eye on ai,
that's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all lowercase, all run
together. They support us, so let's support them.
Craig: 3:06
I'm here at the special
competitive studies project with Ylli Bajraktari.
It's a follow-on organization from the National
Security Commission on AI, which Ylli was also the
executive director of. Ylli, maybe we can start
just by explaining the project, how it originated,
I know the story of the Rockefeller project with
Kissinger, but if you could give that and then
we'll start talking about what you guys do.
Ylli: 4:18
Absolutely and thanks for hosting us on
your podcast. I mean, as I've told you many, many
times, we are big fans of your podcast. I mean,
you're one of the first supporters of our work
with NSCAI and we had an amazing series with you,
so truly appreciate it. And it's a unique
podcast, just so you know, as I told you before,
because it's more specialized about AI and
you have incredible guests. So it's an honor
to be on your show. The origins of the Special
Competitive Studies Project, or the SCSP, really
go back towards the end of the commissions work.
At that point Eric was writing a book with Dr.
Kissinger on the age of AI and Dr. Kissinger spoke
fondly about a project he led in the 50s called
Special Studies Project. I didn't know much about
the Special Studies Project. It's you know 1950s,
not much you can find online. But, as you noted,
Rockefeller Brothers Fund back in the 50s thought
that we are at the turning point in the history
in which you know we're facing a competitor in
Soviet Union. Obviously, the word competition
and competitor was not used back in the 50s,
more like adversary and so they thought that we
still have not created a framework or a vision for
how we should address that competition. I mean,
and this was a battle of systems when you look at,
in the 50s, it was a communist system versus a
democratic system, and I think the outcome was
still unpredictable. Who's going to win at that
point? So I think Rockefeller Brothers Fund funded
a project that Dr. Kissinger led called Special
Studies Project, and over the course of three
years they brought some of the most thoughtful
leaders we had in the 50s from private sector,
academia, and government to think about
how do we get ourselves organized first,
how do we get our society organized, how do we
build our military to face such a competitor,
and then, how do we bring our allies and partners
around the world to believe in the system values
that we were projecting versus what the Soviet
Union was projecting. And so, Dr. Kissinger
late Dr. Kissinger now, in the summer of 2021,
talked to Eric about relaunching that initiative.
Ylli: 6:25
I had initial conversation
with Eric about this and when you think about it
in 2021, same with the establishing of NSCAI we
were really at the crossroad of the beginning
of this AI revolution, but also a changing
geopolitical world order. And so I thought we
were positioned in a really unique place to
create a Special Competitive Studies Project. I
added competitive in the title because I called
my old boss and mentor, Bob Work and I said, hey,
I'm thinking about launching this project. Eric is
really interested. Would you join? First
of all, what do think about the project?
Ylli: 7:08
And he said you've got
to add competition in the title because we're in
competition with China, and in competition with
China, you either win or lose, and you're familiar
with Bob Work. You hosted him numerous times on
your show. He's a really thoughtful leader when
it comes to grand strategy, China competition,
and AI. And so obviously I listened to him, and
we added C in our title to make it a little bit
different from the project in the 50s. And
so, with that in mind, we created SCSP.
Ylli: 7:41
Initially,
the conversations with Eric were that
we were focused on a three-year project,
just because in my mind and I think in Eric's
mind, is, if we are here in March of 25, 26,
and we're still talking about the same topics that
you and I have talked many times on your podcast.
Ylli: 7:54
I think we might be risking of falling
behind China. Now, you see also a convergence of
what we call the axes of disruptors China, Russia,
Iran, and North Korea against the democratic
block, and I think the challenge in 25, 20,
30 timeframe is much, much higher of a
conflict that could come between these
two systems of thoughts, of political systems,
and beliefs, and so I think SCSP could play a
vital role there in terms of, like, how do we
get ourself organized, how do we, you know,
increase awareness of what's going on and play a
role like they did in the 50s, in which, you know,
when they published their book, which sold
400,000 copies and it's really difficult to
find it called Prospect for America, you know
they educated and informed American citizens,
obviously, of what we were facing against in
terms of Soviet Union challenge, and I think
that then got ourselves organized from the 50s
to the end of the Cold War, where we ultimately
won. And so that's sort of like the origins of
SCSP Greg, but happy to answer any questions.
Craig: 9:08
Yeah, and you’ve
come out with a series of reports, and my
understanding is your audience is really the
legislative branch and the executive branch,
right? You’re trying to influence policy,
and I know shortly after the end of the National
Security Commission there was the CHIPS Act,
which I don't know the inner workings,
but it sounded like it came right out of
the NSCAI's final report. So, can you talk
about how that pipeline gets implemented?
Ylli: 9:44
Yeah. So, first of all,
let me talk about the NSCI. When you go back in
2018, when I think the legislation got passed for
the creation of NSCI, I think you know, in 2018,
the issue of AI and the geopolitical competition
was not on everyone's mind probably, um, and
so I think what I give congress credit to is,
um, they were getting signals a, from
private sector, that there's a powerful
technology coming that you have covered for such
a long time, and that, b China, our competitor,
our main competitor uh, really is putting all
the resources, all sort of like the energy,
behind this technology, because at that time,
they came up with this strategy that they
wanted to be the global AI power by 2030. And
so, I think, with these two factors in mind,
congress created the commission. I also think it's
the first time that, in absence of our federal
government having a clear strategy on a specific
technology, congress stepped in to fill that void,
and I think they do this with commissions, as
you know, occasionally and so I think we stepped
into a space in which was number one, highly
bipartisan. You know the CHIPS Act, but like,
when you put technology competition in China,
there's a huge bipartisan support in Congress
because I think there's a wide recognition that
failure to, uh, stay behind in this technology
could have consequential impact for our
society and our economy and ultimately,
national security, and so I think the NSCI really
moved into that space. We were lucky and fortunate
that Congress appointed 15 individuals with
a huge difference in their background. That,
I think, benefited us as a staff at that point,
but also when we were going around departments and
agencies and looking at what they were doing with
AI and what do they need to do more. I think these
individuals really stepped forward to serve the
country. I don't think that gets much credited in
today's environment, to be honest with you, but
having some of the top technology leaders, some
of the top academic leaders and some of the top
former government officials looking at what can
we do more for our country in this competition,
I think that would deserve much bigger praise.
Ylli: 12:06
In terms of the audience
our job with NSCI was pretty straightforward.
We had to provide Congress with recommendations
on how do we maintain global AI leadership
for national security purposes and I'd like
to underscore the national security piece here
because the commission was not. What can we do
with AI in terms of our education and our society
and our healthcare. You know, the commission was
tasked by the armed services community on
the Hill, so the number one customer were
the armed services agencies and the intelligence
community, and so we had a really narrow focus.
Ylli: 12:37
What we tried to do with
SCSP from the beginning, Craig, is that we take
more of a whole of nation approach, and so we have
a team that is focused on the economic impact of
AI. We have a team that is focused on, you know,
what are the next generation of technologies that
we have to stay ahead. We cover the impact on
education, impact on workforce, some of the topics
that were not included during the NSCI work,
in terms of audience. You're right, obviously,
Congress is a major piece of who we try to inform.
Ylli: 13:13
We also work with all
the departments and agencies in Washington and,
more broadly, with governors and state levels and
anybody else, because, as I said, we try to take
a different approach with SCSP, like more of a
whole of nation. If you and I believe that AI is a
transformative technology or once in a generation
technology, then I think this is more than just
a national security challenge or opportunity we
have. We have to take a more of a holistic, whole
of nation transformation approach to this. And so,
with SCSP, we take more of that approach. We
spend a lot of time, you know, at the state,
local level. We spend much more time with allies
and partners. And so we try to like, we try to
analyze, like, what are some of the implications
and what are some of the huge opportunities AI
will have for across, you know, domains from
economy and society and national security.
Craig: 14:05
Right, let's talk about some
of the specific reports and recommendations.
You came out with this Offset-X strategy,
which is sort of a reference to the Third Offset
strategy under Ash Carter, I think it was.
Ylli: 14:24
And Bob Work.
Craig: 14:24
What's that?
Ylli: 14:25
And Bob Work
Craig: 14:26
I'm sorry. Yeah,
Bob was kind of the driver and that's as
you just said, you're really focused on
the competition with China. I'm curious you guys
look at China closely, you track it. There has
been a debate about how advanced China is. There
was this Australian think tank that came out and
said China's ahead in, I don't remember 33 of
47 categories or something. I'm sure you know
Jeffrey Ding at George Washington here in DC. His
argument is that you can't look at those top-line
numbers. You have to look at, you know, which
are patents and papers and funding. You have
to look at the diffusion, as he calls it, of
AI into the economy and that if you look at,
through that lens, the US remains far ahead
of China. And he argues that there's a certain
amount of hype around the China threat in order
to get policy passed. So, you guys look at this?
Ylli: 15:42
Yeah, absolutely. So,
you raised a lot of questions there. You started
with Offset-X which I can come back later if you
want, Craig but in terms of US versus China,
so we have looked into this for a while now
and there's a pre GenAI period probably
and there's, I think, post-gen AI period,
which I think people sometimes, as you
know, mix both, what AI and Gen AI is.
Ylli: 16:07
The first interim report we published
with NSCI, which was a requirement from Congress,
we came up explicitly saying that you know we are
ahead by maybe two years, but they're catching up
fast. And so, I think that was our first judgment
that we made with NSCI, and I think our thinking
there was similar to what you mentioned, Jeff Ding
and everybody else talking about. It's not just
the level of investment, it's the application,
adoption, people, hardware. There are numerous
factors you can compare here and sometimes,
as you know, this is not like an apples-to-apples
analysis just because they have a different
system, and we have a different system. But when
you look at it, on just some high-level themes,
did they have a centrally pushed policy
to invest and get ahead in AI? Yes,
they did. It's a public strategy that they
had where they organized for that competition
competition? Yes, they were. Just because they
have a different political system, they can drive
their private sector in this competition because
there's a similar fusion that they have. Did they
put enormous resources behind this? They did.
Did they appoint national AI champions to serve
as the companies that will propagate and advance?
Or, like the CCP agenda, globally? Yes, they did.
Ylli: 17:30
We all know that I mean,
and so I think in some aspects, the pre-gen AI
period. They were moving fast, and I think that
was the concern that led Congress to create
NSCI, because all the signals coming out of
Beijing were that they have taken this technology
so seriously. And I didn't mention data, I didn't
mention the application that we have seen against
the minority population. They have done the use
of surveillance cameras and all those things. So,
all these, like small tactical elements, when you
add them at the strategic level, was a source of
concern for our country I think, so that's one.
Ylli: 18:07
The second thing I
would argue is um, um is that, as you know, this
is a dual-purpose technology. So, I think like,
you cannot in isolation say oh, let them get ahead
in AI because we are leading in other elements of
the technology competition. I believe, because AI
is more akin to a general-purpose technology. You
cannot have your main competitor, who also
is a completely different political system,
get ahead in that space, and so that's
why I think the concern was in 18, 19,
and 20, is that, with those elements in mind
and those signals coming out of Beijing,
we have to get ourselves organized, we have
to finance ourselves, put enough resources.
I think CHIPS Act is one of the elements, I
think, towards that end. So that's one thing.
Ylli: 19:00
Post GenAI,
I think it's a little bit different conversation.
First, because most of the, I think, best models
came out of US companies' number one. So, there's
an advantage there that I think we have. Secondly
is that a lot of these models, as you know, need a
lot of data to be trained, and the internet is 60%
in English and I think it's 2% to 5% in Mandarin,
if I'm not mistaken, and so the training of these
models requires a lot of data in your native
language, and I think that's what probably holds
China back in some elements. Third is, we placed
a lot of controls on cutting-edge chips, which I
think makes Chinese companies really difficult
to get to these models without having access to
these cutting-edge chips, and you're familiar with
the export controls we placed on high-end chips.
Ylli: 19:52
And then the last element here is that we live in
a democracy. You can easily prompt these models to
say something about you or me, or political system
or political leadership, and they'll do it so long
you know you're not offending somebody or you're
not seeking to use it for malign purposes. As you
know, you can't do this in China, and I think that
will hold China back in, probably, these models,
because they'll probably have to place much more
or heavier control on the models, and these models
get better and better by using them, as you know.
So, I think Gen AI gives you a different picture.
Will this stop China? I don't think so because,
as you know, they understand that this is a
critical technology. Are they going to seek
a different architecture, to go after different
AI models and take a pass on Gen AI competition?
Probably, because I think there are multiple
ways here to get to the next generation of AI
models. But I think right now, with these models
being released from primarily US companies,
you can make, I think, a serious bet that we
are definitely ahead in two to three years time.
Craig: 21:05
Yeah, and on the GenAI,
it’s interesting, the idea that they’ll
maybe will take a pass on that, but already
the technology of the research is moving beyond
large language models into multimodal models, …
Ylli: 21:21
Exactly.
Craig: 21:03
combinations of LLMs and—
Ylli: 21:24
Video and audio.
Craig: 21:25
Yeah, language, I mean
large visual models. DeepMind has some amazing
work out and OpenAI just came out with Sora,
which people look at as, kind of entertainment,
but there is the kernel of AGI in there.
Ylli: 21:04
Yea
Craig: 21:47
So, things are moving so fast.
How do you guys keep up with that? How do you keep
Congress and the executive branch and work with
them to keep them at the leading edge, because
governments everywhere are notoriously slow?
Ylli: 22:02
Yeah Well, I mean, I think the release of ChatGPT
really gave us a new momentum. And then you know
this I mean, all of a sudden, you know, everybody
started to talk about AI. People are using these
models now and we're facing probably a phase which
I think in the next three years we're going to
live in, this co-piloting phase, where you know
everything we do is with these models. So, I think
the conversation has changed dramatically, Greg,
as you know, from like 2019 and 20, because now AI
has become mainstream and so, to a certain degree,
this is no longer a difficult space to explain
to people what it means. Because I think,
if you look at just the, in the last four months,
what has happened in this space? You have the
White House releasing the White House executive
order on AI. It's probably one of the longest
EOs you have ever seen, and I think that is a
demonstration of how seriously the White House has
taken this technology. I can never recall I cannot
recall a technology that we have released such
a deep and thorough executive order to all the
departments and agencies. So that's one. You have
a massive effort on the congressional side, led
by four senators Senator Schumer, senator Young,
senator Heinrich and Senator Rounds that have
organized hearings after hearings, called the
AI Insight Forum, in educating members of Congress
and Senate about AI from all aspects of our lives.
You had civil rights leaders, you have technology
leaders, you had national security leaders really
coming in front of senators explaining the
implications of Gen AI for our country. On
our allies and partners side, you have the EU AI
Act that was passed a month ago or two months ago,
so just in the last four months you have this
enormous activity on the policy side of trying
to get ahead on a technology that is moving so
fast, as you know, and so we will always face
that challenge, like how do you stay ahead on a
technology that constantly changes? New models
are released and then you have the open-source
path, you have the proprietary models path,
but I think, from the awareness perspective,
I think everybody's aware this is moving and
there are efforts to understand how do we stay
ahead, how do you get organized to stay ahead.
Ylli: 24:41
Because I think,
if you look at our government institutions,
they are built after World War II with the
1947 Act. So, I usually use the example of
Department of Commerce. If you look at our,
key elements of our competition with China
reside within Department of Commerce, but that
Department of Commerce was built for the Cold War
competition, and now we're in this techno-economic
competition with China. So, do we have to reform
institutions? Do you need to create new ones?
Ylli: 25:11
After 9-11,
we created a range of institutions. We use the
example that even at the White House, you need
a different constellation of um councils, uh,
to go after the technology competition. I think
I used this example in the past, but after World
War II, we created the National Security Council
of the White House because security was the
predominant domain of competition between us and
Soviet Union. After the cold war ended, we created
the National Economic Council because the economy
became you know, as part of that globalizing
you know, discourse the key component of the
World Order. And then, after 9-11, we created a
Domestic Policy Council to focus on, you know,
issues related to terrorism, counterterrorism,
you know, our presence in Middle East and whatnot.
Ylli: 26:07
So, are we now
in a new era? I believe so. Are we organized
for this era? Not yet. All the departments and
agencies as you know, Craig, are moving, but
usually our government moves when something
bad happens and requires us to wake up. I think
9-11 was that wake-up call and we created DNI,
and we created all these other agencies and
offices. I think AI has that momentum for us
to relook or reorganize for the AI era and I think
we were at the beginning, as you know, of the AI
era because it will have huge implications for
the education and workforce and government and
everything else. So, I think that is when I
think we step in as SCSP, because we have the
luxury to think outside. We're also surrounded by
technologies, academics, private sector leaders
who think a lot in this space, and so then what
we do is we take all these conversations and we
put it in a format to help our government
move forward on all these conversations.
Craig: 27:04
Yeah, there's
so much to talk about. Can you give
us a quick overview of the Offset-X
strategy? And then I want to talk about
the action plan for microelectronics.
Ylli: 27:15
No problem. So Offset-X,
one of our lines of effort here, is focused on
the implications of AI and all these, emerging
tech for the military and the future of warfare,
and so you mentioned Third Offset. I was really
fortunate to work for Bob Work, and a lot of
things that Bob Work was trying to push through,
uh, inside the Department of Defense really was
um, early identification that the the warfare
is changing. And so, I'm talking about 2014,
15, and 16 when I think he started talking
about the implications of technology and AI, the
future warfare, china really trying to get ahead,
us losing sort of like the military supremacy and
whatnot. And so, what we tried to do with Offset-X
is really looking at, you know, what are some
of the key technologies that are happening right
now that could give us an edge on the battle
space. We also looked at what's happening in
Ukraine now. So, with those two elements in mind,
we thought that the future of warfare really will
be characterized by three primary factors.
Number one is we will move into the space,
and you can see this in Ukraine and elsewhere
of many network distributed platforms. These are
small. You can think of drones, you can think of
uncrewed systems, but the future of battlefield,
as you see it in Ukraine, is that of drones,
first-person view drones, many highly networked,
communicating with each other, communicating
with humans in sort of like deployment and
execution of the mission, and so that
is one of the elements of the Offset-X.
Ylli: 29:01
The second element
is software supremacy. When you look at what we
have as a country, a comparative advantage over
probably our main competitors is that we have
some of the top leading software companies, and
software is changing everywhere. It has changed
how we work, how we receive information, and it's
changing the warfare. And so how do we and, you
know, our department is really notorious in terms
of buying software and updating it regularly so
how do we stay and how do we make the Department
of Defense a software-oriented department for the
future warfare. If you look at what's happening
again in Ukraine, in Middle East and elsewhere is
that you know, if you have cutting edge software,
it will give you you know information advantage.
It will give you situational advantage,
it will allow you to defend against information
operations that the enemy is pushing towards you,
but also you can launch information operation
against your adversary. So, staying ahead in
the software space was the second element we
thought the Offset-X should be focused on.
Ylli: 30:09
And the third element was
really the human machine teaming. Human machine
teaming because if you look at all these systems,
there's a degree of human control and there's a
degree that then these systems will complement
human advantages. And so, I think as we
move into the future of battle space,
we will have human machine teaming in how we
do intelligence analysis, in terms of how we do
military operations and in terms of how we get
situational awareness and whatnot. So, I think
training humans in using better these capabilities
will allow us to have an edge over our adversary.
Ylli: 30:49
I think our military
is always ahead when it comes to the traditional
training, but I think the situation is changing,
that if the drones have proven to be so
successful in the battle space of Ukraine,
you know, I believe that we should have
a drone unit in every other services
that people are trained on how to use these
drones. Because in, Bob Work has the saying
that every military technology revolution that
has happened, especially in the military space,
has allowed us to focus on precise attacks and
the execution of the mission. That in itself has
limited and diminished the collateral damage,
because the attacks have been more precise,
more targeted, and I think you know this
new wave of technologies will allow us to
enter faster into that space by having AI-enabled
systems that are like human, that have meaningful
human control and they're deployed for, you
know, all aspects of the military operations.
Craig: 31:57
Yeah, there are a couple of things in the
Offset-X strategy that struck me. One, you talk
about, with regard to drones, counter-autonomy
capabilities. The US has been pretty clear to
date that they don't endorse lethal autonomous
weapon systems, but it's a little bit like
refining uranium. It's the same technology,
you just go a little bit further and it's
autonomous. What does that mean? Anti-autonomy?
Ylli: 32:40
Counter autonomy
Craig: 31:57
Yeah, counter autonomy, I'm sorry.
Ylli: 32:43
So there are two things, and I
think we've talked about lethal autonomous weapon
systems. Chapter 4 of the NSCI really covered the
lethal autonomous weapon systems and I think we
came up with some conclusions. Number one was that
the department is really well positioned to build
and deploy these systems, and I think we came to
that conclusion because the commissioners that
came from, as I said, private sector academia,
and former government were exposed to briefings
and policies and procedures that the department
has in place before it builds, tests, and
evaluates and deploys these capabilities, because
I think you have to separate fact from fiction
sometimes in this conversation. I think we were
heavily influenced by a number of movies in this
space, but the reality is a little bit different.
Ylli: 33:41
When you look at the first memo the
department under Secretary Austin issued when it
came to AI, it was on the responsible and ethical
use of artificial intelligence, and I think the
leadership of the Pentagon wanted to demonstrate
that they take this technology seriously like
every other technology they have used in the past.
Ylli: 33:56
There are certain procedures and certain rules
in which they have, before they test, they take,
they test, evaluate and then they deploy these
capabilities. So that's one. The second aspect
of this is that there's a political declaration
the State Department has issued and I think you
have dozens of countries that have signed into
that political declaration that no matter how the
future warfare changes because of these systems,
I think we should make sure that these systems are
built and deployed in a responsible and ethical
way. Obviously, I don't think up to now China or
Russia have signed that political declaration.
I don't expect that because, as you know, we have
never seen anything coming out of Russia or China
in terms of how they plan, how they build
and how they're going to use these systems
and they've used them. I mean, we all know Russia
has used autonomous systems in Syria. They failed,
but still, nevertheless. It's not that, I think
they, follow some kind of policy procedures
like we would in those circumstances. The
second aspect to your question was about—
Craig: 35:01
Well, when you say develop counter autonomy, —
Ylli: 35:04
Yeah, counter-autonomy,
so the counter-autonomy is a different space here,
because we're entering a phase in which you have a
lot of these systems being deployed autonomously
and obviously every autonomous system will have
a counter autonomous systems that seeks to,
you know, block it, shut it down, and whatnot.
Ylli: 35:30
And so are we
positioned even for that space, where a lot of
these systems will be systems against systems
over the air in the battle space. And so how do
you make these systems resilient, cyber proof
that your adversary cannot take it over and turn
it against you? So, I think that is another area
that will probably evolve in an accelerated way
in the next three to five years because as you
can see from the Ukraine battle space, a lot of
these systems are becoming autonomous. I mean,
one of the articles we published was that the
Ukraine airspace is dominated by autonomous
systems small drones or medium-sized drones of
both sides and so in that environment, you know,
how do you build these systems that you can
ensure that they are proof of cyber attack,
that your adversary cannot hack them and
turn them against you. So that is the counter
autonomy piece that I think will enter into the
battle space policy in the next couple of years.
Craig: 36:33
Okay, yeah,
that's interesting. I thought more that counter
autonomy were systems, because if the US is not
using autonomous weapons and the adversary is, you
at least need a way to counter their autonomous
weapons, because it becomes asymmetrical very
quickly. The other thing in the Offset-X, you talk
about disrupting adversary's communications and
I assume because the Offset-X is really looking
at China you now have Russia reportedly planning
to field anti-satellite weapons in outer space,
which would devastate our ability to
communicate. So, yeah, can you talk about that?
Ylli: 37:26
Yeah, no, absolutely,
look, if you look at the importance of space
that has grown over the last couple of years,
both in terms of where our adversary has invested,
deployed and tested capabilities, but also if
you look at the private sector on our side and
how much you know the space has proliferated,
both in terms of launches, in terms of satellite
constellations, and then you know reliance on
Starlink, for example, in Ukraine, that tells
you a lot of how space is a key component now
of the battle space and the warfare. I think
some of the analysis that we have probably
published is you know, I think the first move
by the Russian military against the Ukrainian
military was to try to shut down their, I think,
satellites. And so, this goes back to, like
you know, because space gives you information,
awareness, communication, command, and control,
and so space is a critical component of how we're
organized now for the future of the warfare.
Craig: 38:32
You talk about,
on the national plan for microelectronics, you
talk about addressing the threat of China's
massive build out of legacy chips, and there's
some other really interesting things in there-
this innovator visa category, which I'm all
for. On the Chinese chips though, there's
been a big debate about whether the export
controls haven't created a bigger problem.
Ylli: 39:04
Yeah, first of all,
I think the export control really aimed to what
I think the National Security advisor said,
you know, high fence, small garden approach. The
export controls were designed, I think, in a way,
and targeted to prevent China from having
access to the cutting-edge semiconductors.
Not all semiconductors, but the cutting-edge
semiconductors. So that's one thing, because
I think, as you know, these are the semiconductors
that allow you to get to these high-end AI models.
So that's one. I don't think that has prevented
China from investing on all other aspects of
semiconductor industry, nor, I think, it has
prevented China from trying to circumvent
export controls by getting access to, you know,
clouds in third countries or buying a new design
of a similar chip from certain companies.
So, I think the issue of export controls,
I think it did have an effect I mentioned
earlier, look at the general AI models where
are our companies versus the Chinese companies?
So that's one. Secondly is, these export controls
have been in place since October 2022. So usually,
you know, these effects will not be immediate.
Ylli: 40:30
You have to think
about it in terms of three to five years
and how much I think that has an effect
on the Chinese access to these capabilities
and I think, as I think the White House has
said many, many times, these were not
intended to slow China down forever.
Ylli: 40:53
They were intended
to give us a competing edge, a window
that we stay the leading technology,
and while we did the protect side of the
export controls, we also did the promote.
We have invested through the CHIPS Act $52
billion on domestic fabs, and then companies
have also came on top of that to announce their
investments here, and so I think not only you
have to slow them down, you continuously have
to evolve in this space. Secretary Raimondo
said yesterday that maybe we might need
another CHIPS Act, and I think the demand,
as you can see from what's happening right now
with the CHIPS worldwide, is so big that I could
probably foresee another CHIPS Act in the next,
because I think the first CHIP Act was like just
trying to catch up and I think staying ahead in
this space will probably require more investment.
Craig: 41:45
Yeah, I guess what
I'm referring to is it's also spurred
China to have a national plan to become
independent in high-end semiconductors you
know everything from lithography on and that's
not necessarily a good thing if they're
no longer dependent on Western supplies.
Ylli: 42:08
No, and I understand that argument,
Craig I would argue that China would have done
that anyway, because I think, if you look at
the China policy made in China 2025, which is also
known as the dual circulation policy is they have
a strategy in place and this is a public document
that they want to be independent from the world
supply chain, but they want the rest of the world
to be dependent on their supply chain, and so I
think they would pursue the semiconductor path of
independence, regardless of our export controls,
Ylli: 42:49
just because they
look at what's happening in Ukraine, with
us sanctioning Russia and their access to
semiconductors and I think the technology aspect
or their national security approach is it,
shouldn't serve as a weak point in whatever
they decide to do around Taiwan, wherever the
global ambitions are in South/Southeast Asia,
and so I don't think they would have let the
technology piece be their weak point in pursuing
their regional and global goals. So, I think,
bottom line, as I said, I think they would have
pursued the path towards semiconductor design,
fabrication and production independent of our
export controls. I think we have managed to
slow them down and I think this will have
implications for the next couple of years.
Craig: 43:38
Can you talk a little
bit about the National Semiconductor
Technology Center, that proposal?
Ylli: 43:44
And so, the National Center was part of our
recommendation with NSCI, because what we argued
in an NSEI report is not only do we need resources
to catch up and build some of these manufacturing
capabilities back to the United States.
Ylli: 43:58
You need a center
that brings together probably our government
labs, university labs to look at what's the
next generation of semiconductors we have to look
after. If you think about it, we're getting close
to the end of the nanometer or the Moore's
law, and so there are different paths now
that you can take in terms of how is the future of
semiconductor going to look like? And I think we
need a center like that. We need a center that the
only job and the only objective is to look at what
does the post-Moore’s law world look like in terms
of semiconductors. I think, with the right actors,
with the right leadership and I think Secretary
Raimondo has been a force of nature in this space.
That center should focus on really coming
out with a couple of options that we should
have as a country, as a government, in pursuing
the next three, ten years of this technology.
Craig: 44:51
Okay, can you
talk about this expo that's coming up in May.
Ylli: 44:54
Yeah, so the expo is probably
a unique gathering in DC. It's a classic AI expo
in a sense that nobody has ever organized this in
Washington. You have AI expos around the world,
you have the CES in Vegas, but in Washington
nobody has ever brought together the technology
companies small, medium-sized and large companies
with government agencies, with academic labs in
one place where they can showcase technology. So
this is not just a conversation, this is not just
releasing another policy document. This is really
bringing together in one place people to see
demos of these technologies, to have conversation
around these technologies, to exchange business
cards, because our government desperately needs
to modernize when it comes to these technologies.
There's an enormous capacity in private sector to
offer these technologies to government. So this
will be a unique place, over the course of two
days at our convention center, may 7th and 8th,
for all these stakeholders to come together, talk,
engage and really deepen their relationship
when it comes to AI and emerging tech.
Craig: 46:02
Yeah, how much
of that will be focused on national security?
Ylli: 46:02
A fraction, Greg,
because what we have said is, you know, there are
probably 19 departments and agencies in Washington
DC, and so I think what we want to focus on is
there's certain elements of the conversation and
companies that are tailored for Department
of Defense and the intelligence community,
but I believe we can provide a useful service
here for health and human services, FEMA,
because, as you know, these models can do
an incredible predictions of hurricanes,
weather forecasting. So by bringing not just DOD
and IC related companies, but other companies
that have services and have technologies
in this space, I think we would really do a
huge service to other non-DOD and non-IC related
departments and agencies in DC with the AI Expo.
Craig: 46:52
Okay, great well,
I'll be there, and I appreciate the
time. I know you've got a tight schedule.
Ylli: 47:01
Thanks for having me,
Craig. It's always a pleasure
and I’ll see you on May 7th!
Craig: 47:06
Hi, good tech solves
problems that you've thought about. Great tech
solves problems that you haven't even thought of.
What can the commerce platform trusted by millions
of merchants do for you? It's time for Shopify,
the commerce platform revolutionizing millions
of businesses worldwide. Whether you're a garage
entrepreneur or IPO ready, Shopify is the
only tool you need to start, run and grow
your business without the struggle. Shopify
puts you in control of every sales channel. So,
whether you're selling satin sheets from Shopify's
in-person point of sale system or offering organic
olive oil on Shopify's all-in-one e-commerce
platform, you're covered. Shopify powers 10% of
all e-commerce in the United States and Shopify's
a truly global force powering Allbirds, Rothy’s,
and Brooklyn and millions of other entrepreneurs
of every size across over 170 countries. Plus,
Shopify’s award-winning help is there to
support your success every step of the way.
Craig: 48:15
Sign up for a $1 per month trial period at
shopify.com/eyeonai, that's shopify S-H-O-P-I-F-Y
dot com slash eye on ai, that's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all
run together. So, sign up for a $1 a month trial
period at shopify.com/eyeonai, that’s shopify
S-H-O-P-I-F-Y dot com slash eye on ai, that's
E-Y-E-O-N-A-I all lowercase, all run together.
They support us, so let's support them. That's
it for this episode. I want to thank Ylli for
his time. If you're in the Washington DC area in
May, be sure to check out the special Competitive
Studies Project's AI Expo. I'll be there and
if you see me, say hello. In the meantime,
remember the singularity may not be near, but
AI is changing your world, so pay attention.